[DOC] adding prometheus-operator-cli design proposal (#6435)
prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator: Documentation/proposals/202403-prometheus-operator-cli.md

# Prometheus Operator CLI

- Owners:
  - [Nicolas Takashi](https://github.com/nicolastakashi)
- Related Tickets
  - [#6423](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/6423)
- Other docs:
  - N/A

This document proposes a new CLI tool to manage Prometheus Operator resources, allowing users to create, update, and delete Prometheus Operator resources using a simple CLI interface as well as
troubleshoot and debug Prometheus Operator resources.

# Why

Throughout the years, we received feedback from users (through workshops, support tickets, slack, email, etc) that managing Prometheus Operator resources is difficult and error-prone. Users reported that they often encounter issues when creating, updating, and deleting Prometheus Operator resources, and that troubleshooting and debugging Prometheus Operator resources is challenging, below you can find some of the issues that users reported:

## Why my Prometheus resource is not being created?

> People were struggling to troubleshoot why their Prometheus resources were not being created. They were not sure if the issue was with the Prometheus Operator or with the Prometheus resource itself.

Reviewer: Seems like these sentences are describing Contribfest participants' experience. But yes, if it's general user experience then present tense would be better.

- We can have a dedicated team to maintain the Prometheus Operator CLI
- We can use the Prometheus Operator client as a customer and be more careful with the changes that we make in the Prometheus Operator codebase
- We can have a dedicated release cycle for the Prometheus Operator CLI

## General features

Initially, the Prometheus Operator CLI will have the following features:

### Resource scaffolding

Allow users to create Prometheus Operator resources using a simple CLI interface, the CLI should generate the resource manifest based on the user input.

This is especially useful for users that are not familiar with the Prometheus Operator resources, they can use the CLI to generate the resource manifests and then customize according to their needs.

For example, the CLI should allow the creation of a Prometheus object and the related Kubernetes objects such as service account, RBAC, service, pod disruption budget, and other related objects.

> ### Linting and Validation

Reviewer 2: Funnily enough, #6474 just popped up 😄

- Users that prefer a CLI-focused approach to manage and troubleshoot prometheus-operator resources.

# How

We propose to create a new CLI tool allowing users to create, update, and delete Prometheus Operator resources using a simple CLI interface as well as troubleshoot and debug Prometheus Operator resources. As a source of inspiration, the new cli could work as the example below, for different commands:

## Create a Prometheus resource interactively mode

The CLI could provide an interactive mode, where users can answer questions to create the Prometheus resource with the desired configuration.

```bash
kubectl prometheus-operator create prometheus example --interactive
How many replicas (default: 2)?
How many shards (default: 1)?
Create service account (Yes/No, default: Yes)?
Service account name (default: example)?
Create service (Yes/No, default: Yes)?
...
Create Pod disruption budget (Yes/No, default: Yes)?
Service monitor selector (default: {})?
Service monitor namespace selector (default: {})?
```

## Troubleshoot

The CLI could provide an troublehosot command, where users can check if the Prometheus resource is correctly configured.

```bash

> kubectl prometheus-operator troublehosot prometheus --name prometheus --service-monitor 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
kubectl prometheus-operator troubleshoot prometheus --name prometheus --service-monitor 
```

ServiceMonitor exists: yes
ServiceMonitor matches selector: yes
Prometheus has been reconciled: yes
Prometheus has the job: yes
Prometheus discovered the targets: yes
Prometheus scrapes the targets: yes
```

## Where the code will live?

The prometheus-operator-cli code will be placed in a dedicated repository under the [Prometheus-Operator organization](https://github.com/prometheus-operator), this will allow us to have a separate lifecycle for the Prometheus Operator and the Prometheus Operator CLI and the following benefits:

- We can have a dedicated team to maintain the Prometheus Operator CLI
- We can use the Prometheus Operator client as a customer and be more careful with the changes that we make in the Prometheus Operator codebase
- We can have a dedicated release cycle for the Prometheus Operator CLI

### Linting and Validation

Allow users to validate Prometheus Operator resources before creating them, the CLI should check if the resource manifest is valid.

This is especially useful for CI pipelines, where users can validate the Prometheus Operator resources before applying them to the cluster.

# Action Plan

> 1. Create a new repository under the Prometheus organization

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Create a new repository under the Prometheus-Operator organization
```

2. Create a new CLI startup project.
3. Implement scaffolding feature for the main Prometheus Operator resources.
4. Implement linting and validation feature.

> 5. Implement a interactive mode for the CLI.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. Implement an interactive mode for the scaffolding feature.
```

The main idea is to distribute this CLI as a [kubectl plugin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubectl/kubectl-plugins/) and the user experience should be similar to the `kubectl` CLI, as you can see in the example below:

```bash
kubectl prometheus-operator create prometheus --name my-prometheus --namespace my-namespace --replicas 2 --shards 2
```

### Where the code will live?

The prometheus-operator-cli code will be placed in a dedicated repository under the [Prometheus organization](https://github.com/prometheus-operator), this will allow us to have a separate lifecycle for the Prometheus Operator and the Prometheus Operator CLI and the following benefits:

- We can have a dedicated team to maintain the Prometheus Operator CLI
- We can use the Prometheus Operator client as a customer and be more careful with the changes that we make in the Prometheus Operator codebase
- We can have a dedicated release cycle for the Prometheus Operator CLI

### General features

The Prometheus Operator CLI should have the following features, but not limited to:

#### Resource scaffolding

> Allow users create Prometheus Operator resources using a simple CLI interface, the CLI should generate the resource manifest based on the user input.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Allow users to create Prometheus Operator resources using a simple CLI interface, the CLI should generate the resource manifest based on the user input.
```

- Other docs:
  - N/A

This document proposes a new CLI tool to manage Prometheus Operator resources, allowing users to create, update, and delete Prometheus Operator resources using a simple CLI interface as well as
troubleshoot and debug Prometheus Operator resources.

# Why

During KubeCon Paris 2024, we received feedback from users that managing Prometheus Operator resources is difficult and error-prone. Users reported that they often encounter issues when creating, updating, and deleting Prometheus Operator resources, and that troubleshooting and debugging Prometheus Operator resources is challenging, below you can find some of the issues that users reported:

## Why my Prometheus resource is not being created?

People were struggling to troubleshoot why their Prometheus resources were not being created. They were not sure if the issue was with the Prometheus Operator or with the Prometheus resource itself.
After long investigation, they found out that the Prometheus Operator were only watching the namespace where the Prometheus Operator was deployed, and the Prometheus resource was being created in a different namespace.

## Why my ServiceMonitor is not being created?

> People were struggling to troubleshoot why their ServiceMonitor resources were not being created. They were not sure if the issue was with the Prometheus Operator or with the ServiceMonitor resource itself.

Reviewer 4: > why their ServiceMonitor resources were not being created

Do you mean that it's hard to understand why a pod isn't scraped by Prometheus rather?

After long investigation, they found out that the matchingLabels field in the ServiceMonitor resource was not matching the labels of the target Service.

These are just some common issues that users reported, but there are many other issues that users face when managing Prometheus Operator resources, and we believe that a CLI tool can help users to manage Prometheus Operator resources more easily and efficiently.

# Pitfalls of the current solution

At the moment people are struggling to manage Prometheus Operator resources, they have to manually create, update, and delete Prometheus Operator resources using `kubectl` or other tools, and troubleshooting and debugging Prometheus Operator resources is challenging.

# Goals

> The main goal of this proposal is to create a new CLI tool to manage and operate Prometheus Operator.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The main goal of this proposal is to create a new CLI tool to manage and operate Prometheus Operator resources.
```

# Non-Goals

> - Replace any existing config management tools such as kustomize or helm

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Replace any existing config management tools such as Kustomize or Helm.
```

# Audience

> - Users that are using Prometheus Operator to monitor their Kubernetes clusters

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Users that are using Prometheus Operator to monitor their Kubernetes clusters.
```

```bash
kubectl prometheus-operator create prometheus --name my-prometheus --namespace my-namespace --replicas 2 --shards 2
```

## Where the code will live?

The prometheus-operator-cli code will be placed in a dedicated repository under the [Prometheus organization](https://github.com/prometheus-operator), this will allow us to have a separate lifecycle for the Prometheus Operator and the Prometheus Operator CLI and the following benefits:

- We can have a dedicated team to maintain the Prometheus Operator CLI
- We can use the Prometheus Operator client as a customer and be more careful with the changes that we make in the Prometheus Operator codebase
- We can have a dedicated release cycle for the Prometheus Operator CLI

## General features

The Prometheus Operator CLI should have the following features, but not limited to:

### Resource scaffolding

Allow users to create Prometheus Operator resources using a simple CLI interface, the CLI should generate the resource manifest based on the user input.

> This is especially useful for users that are not familiar with the Prometheus Operator resources, they can use the CLI to generate the resource manifests and then customize according to their needs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is especially useful for users that are not familiar with the Prometheus Operator resources, they can use the CLI to generate the resource manifests and then customize according to their needs.

For example, the CLI should allow the creation of a Prometheus object and the related Kubernetes objects such as service account, RBAC, service, pod disruption budget, ...
```

# Prometheus Operator CLI

- Owners:
  - [Nicolas Takashi](https://github.com/nicolastakashi)
- Related Tickets
  - [#6423](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/6423)
- Other docs:
  - N/A

This document proposes a new CLI tool to manage Prometheus Operator resources, allowing users to create, update, and delete Prometheus Operator resources using a simple CLI interface as well as

> troubleshoot and debug Prometheus Operator resources.

Author: It was wrong 😓

# Why

> During KubeCon Paris 2024, we received feedback from users that managing Prometheus Operator resources is difficult and error-prone. Users reported that they often encounter issues when creating, updating, and deleting Prometheus Operator resources, and that troubleshooting and debugging Prometheus Operator resources is challenging, below you can find some of the issues that users reported:

Author: Fair point, much better with this suggestion.

> During KubeCon Paris 2024, we received feedback from users that managing Prometheus Operator resources is difficult and error-prone. Users reported that they often encounter issues when creating, updating, and deleting Prometheus Operator resources, and that troubleshooting and debugging Prometheus Operator resources is challenging, below you can find some of the issues that users reported:

Reviewer: Just a question: GMP also participated in Contribfest right? Did Contribfest participants report similar issues to GMP? Whether yes or no, how do GMP solve this problem? Do they solve it with a similar approach like this?

## Why my Prometheus resource is not being created?

People were struggling to troubleshoot why their Prometheus resources were not being created. They were not sure if the issue was with the Prometheus Operator or with the Prometheus resource itself.
After long investigation, they found out that the Prometheus Operator were only watching the namespace where the Prometheus Operator was deployed, and the Prometheus resource was being created in a different namespace.

## Why my ServiceMonitor is not being created?

People were struggling to troubleshoot why their ServiceMonitor resources were not being created. They were not sure if the issue was with the Prometheus Operator or with the ServiceMonitor resource itself.

After long investigation, they found out that the matchingLabels field in the ServiceMonitor resource was not matching the labels of the target Service.

> These are just some common issues that users reported, but there are many other issues that users face when managing Prometheus Operator resources, and we believe that a CLI tool can help users to manage Prometheus Operator resources more easily and efficiently.

Reviewer 3: This sounds vague and doesn't add value to the `Why` or `Pitfalls of the current solution`

If there are more problems that we want to solve, let's mention them 😬 

"We believe that a CLI tool..." is part of the solution, not the Why

# Pitfalls of the current solution

> At the moment people are struggling to manage Prometheus Operator resources, they have to manually create, update, and delete Prometheus Operator resources using `kubectl` or other tools, and troubleshooting and debugging Prometheus Operator resources is challenging.

Reviewer 3: I think the issues you pointed out above can be explored and explained in this section instead of having subsections under `Why`.

Troubleshooting Alertmanager, Prometheus and Thanos ruler pod creation is very manual and requires domain knowledge about what RBAC permissions are needed.

Target discovery also requires domain knowledge, understanding label selectors, RBAC permissions, etc. 

And we could add links to existing support issues here in Github, StackOverflow, or Slack to show that we have data to back this up.

Reviewer 3: And what do you think about not adding a subsection for the problems mentioned? I feel like it's an overkill to add very big title just to say 1 paragraph 🤔

Author: @ArthurSens could you review?

# Goals

> The main goal of this proposal is to create a new CLI tool to manage and operate Prometheus Operator resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The main goal of this proposal is to reduce the manual effort and domain knowledge needed to manage and operate Prometheus Operator resources.
```

The CLI is the proposed solution, not the goal :)

# Non-Goals

- Replace any existing config management tools such as Kustomize or Helm.

# Audience

> - Users that are using Prometheus Operator to monitor their Kubernetes clusters.

Reviewer 3: In the audience section, we want to be very verbose and explicit about different personas that might be interested in this proposal.

If someone sees this and does not identify himself/herself with the audience, the person might not even read it.

Some personas that I can think of:
* Platform engineers/DevOps/SREs that want to extend their CI validations to prometheus-operator resources.
* Beginners trying out Prometheus-Operator for the first time
* Users that prefer a CLI-focused approach to manage and troubleshoot prometheus-operator resources

# How

We propose to create a new CLI tool allowing users to create, update, and delete Prometheus Operator resources using a simple CLI interface as well as troubleshoot and debug Prometheus Operator resources.

The main idea is to distribute this CLI as a [kubectl plugin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubectl/kubectl-plugins/) and the user experience should be similar to the `kubectl` CLI, as you can see in the example below:

```bash
kubectl prometheus-operator create prometheus --name my-prometheus --namespace my-namespace --replicas 2 --shards 2
```

## Where the code will live?

> The prometheus-operator-cli code will be placed in a dedicated repository under the [Prometheus organization](https://github.com/prometheus-operator), this will allow us to have a separate lifecycle for the Prometheus Operator and the Prometheus Operator CLI and the following benefits:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The prometheus-operator-cli code will be placed in a dedicated repository under the [Prometheus-Operator organization](https://github.com/prometheus-operator), this will allow us to have a separate lifecycle for the Prometheus Operator and the Prometheus Operator CLI and the following benefits:
```

Reviewer 3: And are we open to other names for the CLI? 🙈

- We can have a dedicated team to maintain the Prometheus Operator CLI
- We can use the Prometheus Operator client as a customer and be more careful with the changes that we make in the Prometheus Operator codebase

> - We can have a dedicated release cycle for the Prometheus Operator CLI

Reviewer 3: 1) Can also be solved with CODEOWNERS

2) I'm not sure if I'm misunderstanding something here, but if we want to be more careful with Prometheus-Operator codebase as a library, I think it makes more sense to keep the CLI in the same repo as prometheus-operator... since a breaking change would be caught by the IDE. Requiring bumps in go modules would make it a lot slower to catch breaking changes. 

3) Perfect 👍  but you already mentioned that 3 lines above

## General features

> The Prometheus Operator CLI should have the following features, but not limited to:

Reviewer 3: Saying "but not limited to" sounds like you already have plans for more features. If that's true, could they be mentioned in the proposal as well?

 If there are no extra features in mind I would rephrase this part to

```suggestion
Initially, the Prometheus Operator CLI will have the following features:
```

### Resource scaffolding

> Allow users to create Prometheus Operator resources using a simple CLI interface, the CLI should generate the resource manifest based on the user input.

Reviewer 3: Should we mention that user input can be "interactive" and "non-interactive"?

Author: Tbh don't think it makes difference on the proposal, seems to me very especific.

This is especially useful for users that are not familiar with the Prometheus Operator resources, they can use the CLI to generate the resource manifests and then customize according to their needs.

> For example, the CLI should allow the creation of a Prometheus object and the related Kubernetes objects such as service account, RBAC, service, pod disruption budget, ...

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, the CLI should allow the creation of a Prometheus object and the related Kubernetes objects such as service account, RBAC, service, pod disruption budget, and other related objects.
```

### Linting and Validation

> Allow users to validate Prometheus Operator resources before creating them, the CLI should check if the resource manifest is valid.

Reviewer 3: What do you mean by valid? Kubernetes already does validation when applying objects 🤔

Author: The first use case I can see is the validation of the expressions used on rules

Reviewer 5: You can do that on apply as well, no?

Reviewer 4: It's not something that the Kube API can do on its own. You need an admission webhook service: https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/user-guides/webhook/#prometheusrule

This is especially useful for CI pipelines, where users can validate the Prometheus Operator resources before applying them to the cluster.

> ### Troubleshooting and Debugging

Reviewer 3: I don't understand how this section differs from linting?

Are they the same thing, but one in CI and other in live clusters?
